# What's up with Google Maps these days?

I'm a fellow who tends to like Apple products and Apple as a company, but when Apple Maps first came out, you'd be hard pressed to get me to use it. There were many things wrong with the initial offering. It was inaccurate. It lacked public transit directions. The one thing it had going for it was that it looked *slick*. The vectors were seamless, the 3D view was neat (if inaccurate), and the "progressive enchancement" was far better than Google's offering: instead of having blurry images pop in, you instead got chunky, but still crisp, vector lines.

But over the past year, as Apple has been building on Apple Maps, and especially since it brought the Maps app to OSX, I've been noticing myself reaching for Apple Maps before opening a browser tab to maps.google.com. Actually, let me put this another way: Google Maps has been driving me more and more *crazy* over the past year. I don't know when it happened, exactly (though I suspect it has something to do with the WebGL version), but Google Maps has been impossibly slow for me lately. 

One of the most infuriating things is that when a Google Map first loads, it loads as an *image*. Only after a few seconds does the actual JS UI load, allowing you to interact with the map. What this means is that you see the map before you're able to actually interact with it — sometimes many seconds before. Inevitably, I try to drag and scroll a Google Map when I first see it, only to get a dragged image.

What's more, the UI just doesn't seem to work half the time. First, it takes a long time to load. Popups frequently overlap each other. Drag very frequently stops working, forcing me to use the arrow keys. Zoom takes too long and is erratic.

When I learned that Google Maps on iOS supports caching maps for offline use, I was excited. Here was a great feature that Apple Maps didn't offer! However, in practice, this turned out not to work too well. Offline maps seem to expire at arbitrary tiems, rendering them unusuable; and even for un-expired maps, sometimes you have to force-close and restart the app to get them to (hopefully) show up. When you're out in the middle of a foreign city with no internet, this is unacceptable. On the other hand, even though Apple Maps doesn't explicitly allow offline support, it does, in fact, cache large areas of your current location. I'm in Berlin at the moment, and it seems to have catured the city and most of its surroundings without much effort on my part. I admit that I don't know when this cache will be clobbered, but in practice, it works better than Google's solution.

Another vital feature is that Apple Maps always runs at a buttery-smooth 60fps. Google Maps never exceeds 30fps (and I believe often goes below) whether you're running native or in a browser. When I first tried Google's new Maps app on my old iPhone 4, I figured the performance was a bug relating to the new product, or that my iPhone's hardware simply wasn't cutting it anymore. But no: even with an iPhone 5S on iOS8, everything still runs jankily. And it's not even an iOS-specific problem, either: when I tried Google Maps on an Android device, it ran with the same performance bottleneck!

Google says their maps use vectors, but I don't see it. When I zoom in, I get blur. Tiles pop in like they have before. Performance is terrible. How is this possible?

Don't get me wrong: Apple Maps still has a lot of problems, not the least of which is a lack of p

Let's talk about public transit for a moment. The lack of public transit directions on iOS is an absolute deal-breaker for me (as it is for a lot of people), and Apple's half-assed 3rd party solution just doesn't cut it. However, with the release of 3rd party extensions, I think Apple has a tremendous opportunity in its hands. Although it's convenient to have all your public transit directions curated by a central third party (Google, Apple), it's hard for one organization to keep tabs on every public transit system in the world. Google Maps mostly works for me, but I *have* run into situations where the directions are inaccurate. On the other hand, location-specific apps are usually very accurate and up-to-date, and even occasionally offer cool features like GPS tracking for busses, but aren't able to integrate with any system-wide services.

What if Apple *kept* 3rd party transit direction support, but instead of having a search open up a separate app, brought information from the app right into Maps?

This would be a perfect fit with Apple's current strategy. Extensions go through specific channcels to avoid hogging system resources, and in their big reveal for iOS8, they talked about the possibility of future "extension points". With transit extensions, you could have an app transmit local, up-to-the-minute timetables for bus lines, stations, and even have GPS markers for the buses right in the Maps app itself! This isn't something that Google could do, but something that's almost *obvious* for Apple's app-based infrastructure. All the pieces are in place: they just need to give developers an API for it. Can you imagine how cool it would be if you opened maps and saw exactly where all the trains were at any given time?